Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Crews and Daryl Lane.
One of the most honored and respected of today's science fiction authors is the English writer Brian Aldiss.
His first science fiction story was published in 1954, and since then he's won every award the field has to offer, both in this country and throughout Europe.
Aldiss is a craftsman of the highest order.
The attention he gives to style, character, and structure demonstrates the literary polish that often distinguishes British science fiction from American.
He's written a few non-science fiction novels, in fact, that have been bestsellers in England.
We asked him why he chose to concentrate his career in science fiction rather than mainstream literature.
Well, I regard myself as a writer, and this difference that seems to be so apparent to other people is not so apparent to me.
I'm interested in a kind of literature of ideas, and sometimes that strays to one side of the science fiction fence and sometimes to another.
But it's not as though one day I'm riding a horse and the next day I'm riding a cow.
It's just that I'm in the same vehicle all the time, but sometimes the identification marks change.
That's the way I see it.
In some of his personal essays on science fiction, Aldiss tells of how he was introduced to the field as a child through lurid pulp magazines he found at Woolworths.
His family disapproved of his reading such literature, but Aldiss was fascinated and wouldn't give it up.
He explains why he was so drawn to science fiction at an early age.
I believe it was really that I never had a firm conviction as a child that the world was as all the grown-ups claimed it to be.
It seemed to me that it was a much more interesting place than any of them believed, or that they sought to deny it was an interesting place at all.
They were all busy working in their shops and making their money and leading their routine lives.
And I was a bit of a kind of escapologist, you see, when I was a child.
I picked up a phrase from an old cowboy movie where one of the wrestlers says out of the corner of his mouth,
Let's go while the going's good.
And that became a kind of motto for me.
And at the age of four, I was the hottest rustler in East Dereham, Norfolk.
And I used to go while the going was good.
So I had that streak of wildness in me, I suppose you could say.
Aldiss' streak of wildness later led to unique experiments in some of his science fiction novels.
He gained a reputation as an innovator, as a science fiction author who wasn't afraid to introduce new styles and concepts into a fairly traditional field.
Two good examples of his innovative techniques were the novels Report on Probability A and Barefoot in the Head, published in the late 60s.
Their complex styles were avant-garde and confusing to many science fiction readers.
We asked Aldiss if he deliberately sought to open up science fiction or enlarge its boundaries with such experiments.
Well, you understand that's not exactly a motive in writing to expand the field.
I think what you think you're doing at the time is trying to find a little...
How shall we mix the metaphor?
Trying to find a little breathing space where the ground isn't too trampled already by the hordes of other writers.
And so you seek out, I suppose, the perimeters of the field as it's currently defined.
And in that way, if you accidentally extend it well, that's very nice.
And of course, some people are grateful to you and other people are very cross with you for doing it because they say you're breaking the rules.
Next time, we'll talk with Brian Aldiss about some of his works.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show
a commentary on science fiction and fantasy
and here are your hosts
This is Daryl Lane and David Crews
In 1973, Brian Aldiss published a book
on the origin and history of science fiction
entitled Billion Year Spree
He gave us an interesting account of the reasons he wrote the book
including some comments on one of his novels
Barefoot in the Head
Well, I'd written a novel called Barefoot in the Head
and it really didn't receive
a very kind initial attention
although the premise was simple enough
Barefoot in the Head was about
the world stopped in its tracks by drugs
This was the late 60s, remember?
When the flower power people had been around
and we had had all this love-in stuff
and towards the end of the 60s
the bills, as we say in England
the checks were coming in for all that kind of stuff
and they were already finding the fetuses
in the trash cans of Haight-Ashbury
so that Barefoot in the Head was an ambivalent book
written in a difficult language
and I was a little surprised at the tepid response it got
the angry response it got
the anonymous letters
so I thought, well, let's be finished with the science fiction field
and I thought, well, before I leave it
I ought to write down
all that I know and love about it
before I forget
and so really
I settled down with that in mind
to write Billion Year Spree
and also to have an argument
as I raised my hat
and left the science fictional community
but by the time I got to the end of the thing
you know, three years had passed
and just writing the book
turned me on to science fiction again
Billion Year Spree is full of Aldiss' personal
but fascinating ideas
One provocative idea
heresy to some science fiction fans
was that Hugo Gernsback
the father of modern science fiction
was a disastrous influence on the field
We asked Aldiss what he meant by that
Well, as you probably know
that I did say something of that sort
and since then
people have been threatening to break my legs
and my arms
and shoot me and hang me
and kick me out of the science fiction field
and all sorts of things like that
but I guess that
what I was worried about
was the way
science fiction
was segregated
by Gernsback
into a magazine
so that if you wanted to find science fiction
you had to go
to a magazine
that had
a name like
Astounding
or Amazing
or Staggering
which had
a huge
three-dimensional title
with rivets in it
that resulted
in a monoculture
and we all know
that there are dangers
in monoculture
and
I simply thought
that
science fiction
would be better
as an
uncaged animal
that could
rove at large
where it would
but
nowadays
people complain
that science fiction
is segregated
and that people
think you're funny
if you read it
and that
it has to have
a special place
in a bookshop
right next to
weirdo cult books
about
flying saucers
or whatever
well my answer to that is
that yes
I agree
I think that's too bad
I think science fiction
is much better than that
but the reason
why it is there
is because
of the segregation
that was introduced
by Hugo Gernsback
that was my argument
anyone seeking
to gain a perspective
on science fiction
and fantasy
should read
Billion Year Spree
a personal
but fascinating
account of the field
by one of science fiction's
true men of letters
tomorrow more
with Brian Aldiss
this has been the
science fiction radio show
a production of the
Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction
with Odessa College
in Odessa, Texas
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show
So stay with us
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show
A commentary on science fiction and fantasy
And here are your hosts
This is David Crews
And Daryl Lane
Brian Aldiss does unexpected but fascinating things in his science fiction stories
Though Aldiss is often an innovator
He also understands and cherishes the traditions of science fiction
Aldiss has demonstrated his fondness for science fiction's past
By redoing some of its classic novels
An Island Called Moreau, for instance
Was based on H.G. Wells' The Island of Dr. Moreau
And his book Frankenstein Unbound
Drew on Mary Shelley's Frankenstein
Published in 1818
Which some call the first science fiction novel
Aldiss relates the impulse behind his writing of Frankenstein Unbound
I think that I write about the things that fascinate me most
And I'm kind of a literary man
And I certainly
Much admire Mary Shelley's Frankenstein
It's the most remarkable work for anyone
Not least for a young lady
Not quite touching 18
And when I had the impulse to write Frankenstein Unbound
It was really an exegetical impulse
To draw everybody's attention if possible
To the excellence of that original novel
Which as you know has been slandered and pilloried
By the filmmakers
Who've seen nothing better in it
Than a stupid, shambling, and inarticulate monster
I wanted to restore the monster
To his true evil power
As an articulate feeling and maimed being
Worthy of our compassion
And perhaps our hatred
Aldiss says there was a true creative impulse
Behind Frankenstein Unbound
But that wasn't so for an island called Moreau
I have to admit that later on
I did the same thing with Wells'
Island of Dr. Moreau
And that was
I believe
Ill-advised
It's one of the few novels I've written
That didn't begin with
Some kind of genuine
Lust to create
Will to create
With fire in my stomach
I just thought it was something I could do
And that was too tiny a motive
I believe
For the book that I eventually turned out
I don't believe that it
Supersedes
Or in any way
Aids
The Wells
Version
The funny thing is
I have to say
That that novel was extremely well received
In this country
And in Great Britain
Another Aldiss tribute to science fiction's past
Is his novella
The Saliva Tree
It's a playful book
A clever tribute to H.G. Wells
Who happens to be an unseen character in it
It's about an invisible alien monster
Ravaging the countryside of late Victorian England
Invading monsters and invisibility
Are two of Wells' themes of course
And during the story
All of Wells' themes
And the titles of his books
Are somehow worked in
The story's main character
Gregory Rolles
Has been writing letters to H.G. Wells
About the happenings in the countryside
Wells comes to meet Rolles
As the story ends
Our central character
Is about
To relate to H.G. Wells
The horrific events
That have gone on
Down on the farm
And in those events
Are really
The germs
For all of
Wells' science fiction
I mean
You know
There's
There's a kind of a
A joke on H.G. Wells there
I mean
We all owe a great debt
To H.G. Wells
Because
He preempted
Almost all of the
Science fiction themes
And so in a way
The saliva tree
Is a kind of
Horrific joke
To show that in fact
Wells didn't have
Any original ideas
They were all
Given to him
By this guy
Who knocks on the door
At the end of the story
More on the works
Of Brian Aldiss
Next time
This has been
The Science Fiction
Radio Show
A production of
The Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association
Produced in conjunction
With Odessa College
In Odessa, Texas
Coming up next
Is the Science Fiction
Radio Show
So stay with us
This is the
Science Fiction Radio Show
A commentary on
Science Fiction
And fantasy
And here are your hosts
This is Daryl Lane
And David Crews
English science fiction
Author Brian Aldiss
Sometimes writes books
Which are difficult
To categorize
Aldiss has written
Familiar science fiction
Such as his first novel
Which was published
In this country
In 1959
As Starship
But many of his novels
Are experimental
Or avant-garde
In both theme and structure
Report on Probability A
Published in 1969
Is a good example
Of this type
A 1976 novel though
The Malacia Tapestry
Is one of his most
Unique novels
A strange but richly
Rewarding book
And it completely
Resists categories
It could be called
Science Fiction
But it's not quite that
Some might say
It's fantasy
But it's not that either
Aldiss talks about
The inspiration
Behind the book
The model I had
Was a pictorial one
That's often the case
Well in several of my novels
I start from a pictorial beginning
And my pictorial beginnings
With Malacia were the etchings
Which the Italian artist
The Baroque artist GBT Epilo
Made at the end of his life
Towards the end of his life
He retired
And he started
Etching
These mysterious little pictures
Of wizards
Mountebanks
Soldiers
Punchinellos
People being dug out of the ground
From graves
Owls
Serpents burning on altars
All sorts of mysterious symbols
In these lovely little pictures
And no one's actually figured out
What they're meant to be
It's like
A science fictional
Alternative world
Where
Magic rules
I suppose you'd say
And I suppose
That was one of the things
I liked about them
So
I thought
Well if no one else
Can reconstruct
This world
To their satisfaction
I'll have a go at it
And so I started
Writing short stories
Around
The more haunting
Of these etchings
Of Tiepolo's.
Malacia itself
Is a grand city
Which exists
In what appears
To be an alternate universe
Suggestive of Earth's
Ancient past
There is no technology
To speak of
Sorcery of a limited sort
Seems to work
And there are all manner
Of exotic creatures
Such as flying beings
Which resemble humans
The novel's main concern
Is art
An unusual theme
For a science fiction
Or fantasy book
Seemingly more appropriate
For a romantic poet
Aldiss told us
That the theme of art
Came out of a serious illness
He had while writing the book
The effect of this internal complaint
I had this hepatitis
Made me feel that
Well my life span
Was limited
And I had frolicked about
A good deal
And had written some books
That I perhaps
Didn't take as seriously
As I should do
And that what I
dearly loved
Was writing
And that I wanted to make
A statement about art
And really
Malacia is
It's all about art
From the title onwards
If the book has a power
It is
The power of
Meditations on
The nature of art
Which is at once
To transfigure
And at the same time
To petrify
And as you know
Malacia itself
Is
A city-state
Under a curse
Of
Zero change
Well that's like
A work of art
It's like Tiepolo's
Little etchings
They may be forever
Enigmatic to us
But they're forever
Unchanging
The Malacia Tapestry
By one of the masters
Of modern science fiction
A difficult novel
To categorize
But a fascinating one
To read
More with author
Brian Aldiss
On our next show
This has been
The Science Fiction
Radio Show
A production of
The Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association
Produced in conjunction
With Odessa College
In Odessa, Texas
Coming up next
Is the Science Fiction
Radio Show
So stay with us
This is the Science Fiction
Radio Show
A commentary on
Science Fiction
And fantasy
And here are your hosts
This is David Crews
And Daryl Lane
Brian Aldiss' latest
Science Fiction novel
Is the masterful
Achievement of an author
Who is at the height
Of his very awesome powers
It's called
Helliconia Spring
And it's the first volume
Of a trilogy
About an Earth-like planet
Called Helliconia
Aldiss tells us
About the planet
And the books
Helliconia
Is the name
Of a planet
That's really
Much like Earth
And a lot of
Earth-like things
Go on there
But
It is
The child
Of binary suns
And it takes
Two and a half thousand years
To go round
The primary
I mean
Two and a half thousand
Earth years
Which is to say
That between
One winter
And the next
You can have
A whole lot
Of civilizations
Doing a whole lot
Of declining
And falling
And of course
Falling and rising
And so that
These three long volumes
Really just cover
Parts of
One of Helliconia's
Great years
So there's
At once
This marvelous
Continuity
As I see it
Of one year
And yet
Of many generations
And many cultures
And that's
The basic plan
Of the book
They're simply titled
The first one
Is Helliconia Spring
That's the one
That's out
The one I'm writing
Is Helliconia Summer
And after that
I go on
To Helliconia Winter
After centuries
Of a deadening winter
Spring is coming
To Helliconia
And the primitive
Men of the planet
Are waking up
To the greater
Possibilities of life
To higher aspirations
And knowledge
To the construction
Of a new civilization
The first volume
Traces the life
Of a nomadic hunter
Named Yuli
And his descendants
Because the first volume
Is about the sun
Bursting out
The first volume
Is just stacked
Full of things
Bursting out
And people
Animals
Bursting out
It's a great
Bursting out novel
Circling Helliconia
Is a satellite
From Earth
A huge observation
Station
Which monitors
Everything that happens
In Helliconia
And beams it to Earth
Aldiss spent a painstaking
Four years on the book
Striving for accuracy
And realism
Well I hope people
Will find that it's
Full of reality
That's why I say
The moral of it
Should be
Mere existence
Because I think
They recognize
Their own lives
Passing through the book
And the other motive
I had
Was that
I grew rather alarmed
At the way
So much science fiction
Since it's become
More popular
Has been full of
What shall we say
Fantasy
Wish fulfillment
I didn't like that
I think that
Science fiction
Should reflect
The facts of life
The hard facts of life
It shouldn't just be
Some nonsense about
One guy against
A malign empire
Who goes out
And you know
Kills the chief baddie
I thought it should
Have a little more
Contact for reality
And moreover
I'll sound old fashioned
If I say this
But I think
That sort of thing
Is better
For the nation's
Youth
Than the old
Hogwash about
Telepathic dragons
And all the rest of it
Helliconia Spring
Is a remarkable
And unique achievement
By a man who is not
Just a great
Science fiction writer
But one of the
Finest writers
Of our time
This has been
The Science Fiction
Radio Show
A production of
The Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association
Produced in conjunction
With Odessa College
In Odessa, Texas